Hello everybody. Welcome to a new episode of the
Decent. I'm your host, Ricardo Wat. And today I'm
joined for a third time by Dr Edward Watts.
He is the Vasilia, this Professor of Greek Byzantine
Greek History at the University of California, San Diego.
In our two previous conversations, we talked about two
of his books, namely Mortal Republic and The Eternal
Decline and Fall Of Rome. And today we're talking
about another one of his books, IPA, The Life
and Legend of an ancient philosopher. So, Doctor Watts,
welcome back to the show. It's always a pleasure
to everyone.
Thank you. I'm really glad to be back.
So perhaps to contextualize things a little bit here
for people who might not be familiar with Hype
and where she lived in, where she came from.
So could you tell us a little bit about
the social, political and historical context where Hype lived
back in Alexandria?
Sure. Um So our patient is born around 355
ad. And uh this is a moment in the
Roman Empire where there's a really significant transition going
on. The Emperor Constantine converted to Christianity in 3313,
3, 12, 313 ad and initiated this process through
which the Roman Empire was shifting towards a Christian
majority state. So when Constantine converted, the empire was
about 10% Christian. Um Constantine died in 337. It
seems like the um empire tipped to be more
than 50% Christian, maybe around the year 400. So
during hype's lifetime, you have this process unfolding in,
in Rome or in the larger empire where you're
going from a very large majority pagan empire to
a majority Christian empire. And this happens during her
lifetime. But what's interesting in 355 is Ipe is
born in the city of Alexandria in Egypt. And
Alexandria has probably the largest Christian community in, you
know, maybe the world um for any city at
that moment when she's born, it hadn't yet become
a majority Christian city. And so the pagans in
that city are imagining that, you know, Christianity is
a sort of nuisance and it's, it's like large
and they're loud, but they don't really matter. And
uh it becomes very clear that Alexandria has probably
tipped to a Christian majority city when hype is
a child. Uh And so she belongs to um
a, a generation that actually is the first um
urban generation to deal with living in a Christian
majority city. Uh And so that's a really crucial,
it's a really crucial element of her background, right?
Because nobody knows how to do this. I mean,
Christians don't know how to live as a majority
in a major city. And pagans don't know what
to do with a, you know, with a major
city in which they're no longer in the majority.
And this is where she's growing up. She's growing
up as a pagan in this city that like
during her childhood, flipped from majority pagan to majority
Christian
and she remained the pagan through all to her
life, or did she change her religion?
So hype remains a pagan for her entire life.
Um And I think what's important for us and
challenging for us to understand is that paganism in
the fourth century isn't a religion of identity, like
we think of religions now, right? Nobody walked around
and said, I'm a pagan because paganism is in
essence a default religion. Um It's a default religious
category. So everybody who is not a Christian or
a Jew is a pagan. And so there's lots
and lots and lots of different beliefs and practices
that constitute paganism in the fourth century. So for
hypatia paganism is about practice. You know, it's about
what do you do and it's about um what
ways do you live your life so that you're
being consistent with what you think the gods want
and what you believe is going to lead to,
you know, a better outcome spiritually for you and
the people around you. And so I patient very
much is committed to this idea. Um But paganism
for her is a belief system and a set
of practices that ultimately um helps construct the world
in a better way. Uh And so she's very
firmly committed to this. Um And, you know, and
she's very firmly committed to this as a set
of ideas and actions, but it's not for her
an identity, it's really instead something that's part of
a larger embrace of a, of a fashion of,
um living in the world around her. And so
there's no way that she would ever imagine that
this is something that she should turn away from.
But then you mentioned there that the city became
a Christian majority city. And uh I would like
to understand uh I mean, if you, if you
know about that specifically in what ways did the
social dynamics change when it became a Christian majority
city? And was, were the pagans treated differently by
the Christians when they became the majority or not?
I mean, basically, I'm trying to understand if her
being a pagan or remaining a pagan really had
much influence in her than living in a Christian
majority city in terms of how she was treated
and so on.
Yeah. So I think one of the things that
um is a challenge for everybody in the fourth
century is what does it mean to live in
a city where there's a Christian majority? So Alexander
is a very dense city, you know, it's, it
has probably 500,000 people. It's a very small space,
it's more or less an island. Um, AND so
it is a very difficult place for people to,
um, get along without violence erupting. And Alexander had
a history of violence. Um, AND what tended to
happen in these violent confrontations is groups who basically
jostle for dominance in the city. So if you're
the biggest group, you expect that when things reserve
to violence you're gonna win and you're going to
be able to exert your um vision of what
the city should be like in a fashion that
the other side might not like. And what ends
up happening in the middle part of the three
fifties is there is a violent confrontation that pagans
expect they're going to win and they lose and
it becomes clear to them and this is how
we, we can see that it's probably Christian majority.
Um, YOU know, they thought they had a majority
of people and they didn't. Uh And so what
unfolds across the rest of the fourth century and
into the fifth century are these periodic outbursts of
violence where now pagans are fighting as the minority
and Christians are fighting from a position of majority
and the Christian majority is growing um much more
significantly. Um, OVER time. And so by the time
violent outbreaks are happening in the three eighties, there's
no doubt in anybody's mind that, uh you know,
there's a Christian majority and by the time of
apes death in 415, it's a very large Christian
majority. Um And so the so I think the
dynamic in Alexandria that we have to understand is
it's a communal, it's a city in which communal
differences are resolved violently when they can't be resolved
peacefully anymore. And frequently the leaders of those communities
try to diffuse situations so that they don't become
violent, but they also are fully aware that they
can become violent and they are prepared when they
become violent to be able to win when the
violence erupts. Uh And so this is a climate
in which Hypatia is growing up. Um The rules
in Alexandria have been very clear for a very
long time that uh if you cannot resolve things
peacefully, it's within the realm of possibility that you
will resolve things violently. Um And everybody knows this,
but everybody also has an incentive to try to
keep things peaceful for as long as they can
and to prevent things from getting to the point
where violence is going to be necessary. And so
this is the kind of dynamic in which she's
growing up. Um It's a city that has demographic
instability because you have now um rules that have
long been established about settling confrontations violently if you
can't negotiate your way out of them. But nobody
quite knows how large each side is if the
violence is going to come about.
So before we get a little bit more into
her life? Uh What about the intellectual life of
Alexandria back then? What characterized it since we're talking
here about uh woman uh intellectual. So,
yeah, so uh Alexandria in uh the fourth century
ad has, you know, for almost 700 years been
the leading center of um Greek scientific and mathematical
thought and, you know, and medical thought. Um There
is a long standing rivalry between Alexandria and Athens.
Athens, of course, is, is older. Uh And so
Athens has this claim as the center where philosophy
was developed and to a degree where like rhetoric
was developed. But in Alexandria, they really have a
very strong claim to um having invented the most
sophisticated mathematics in the ancient world um to have
invented the most sophisticated scientific um techniques and you
know, to have really advanced um mechanical engineering and
medical um research being done. So there's a rivalry
between Athens and Alexandria that you might wanna think
in, in like an American context would be like
the rivalry between, I don't know, mit and um
a school that, you know, is really, really good
in teaching philosophy and the humanities. Um Alexandria is
the stem school and Athens is the humanities school.
And so by the time you get into the
fourth century, this is the long standing way to
see things, but it isn't exclusive. Alexandria has a
strong tradition of teaching philosophy in a way that
um embeds mathematics in it. So the Alexandrian idea
for a long time had been. Well, yes, philosophy
is very important. Um BUT philosophy is imprecise, you
know, you talk about something like Plato's idea of,
of justice. And Plato says, well, there's a basic
idea of justice that you can encapsulate in this
concept that is a form. Well, Alexander and say,
you know, like what is that? That's totally abstract.
Who knows what a form is? Nobody's ever seen
one we can say though that justice can be
understood as a number. And if you understand it
as a number, then you can explore the elements
of that numbers use um and its characteristics and
how it works in a mathematical system. And that
allows us better to understand how concepts fit together
with each other in a larger world. And so
the Alexandrian idea um was for a very long
time to say, in essence, you wanna know about
virtue, learn math. Um You wanna learn about, you
wanna learn about how to live your life, learn
math, because math is more precise, the relationships are
clearer and they're more defined and you can actually
understand how these concepts work together when you use
them through a sort of mathematical symbolism. Um And
so what Alexandria has done leading up to um
the moment of hype's birth is it's created a
very distinctive brand of um intellectual life that combines
this very long standing tradition of uh mathematical and
engineering and technical learning with a, a sort of
structure that allows you to apply it to more
humanistic um pursuits as well. So this is the
kind of world that hype is born into. Uh
AND she's actually born to the guy who is
the leader of this, this intellectual movement um in
the three fifties.
So now that we so to speak, set up
the stage who was IPA. And exactly what do
we know about her origins, how she grew up,
the kind of education she received and so on.
So I am one of the world's biggest like
Hypatia fans. I love Hypatia. Um And I think
what, what we have to understand with hype is
there's really sort of two versions of her, there's
the version that everybody knows about that's in, you
know, that's most famously celebrated in um the movie
Gara, you know, she's a martyr, she's somebody who
dies for her principles and dies for her philosophical
um practices. And that's true. She does. But I
think when we, when we allow somebody to become
a caricature and we allow them to just be
distilled down into this like one moment where we
define their entire life, we miss who the person
is. And I actually think the person is way
more interesting than the martyr. Um BECAUSE what Hacia
represents uh is, you know, a symbol of rationalism
in a moment of extremism. But what hype actually
was is a woman who was brilliant and had
a vision for how she wanted to change this
Alexandrian philosophical environment and this Alexandrian intellectual environment, um
she understood full uh and completely that as a
woman, this would be a difficult thing to do.
And yet she very actively, very openly and very,
very compellingly presented a vision of philosophy that upset
the entire way that Alexandria thought about philosophy. And
then she applied this to trying to regulate the
public life in this city that of course, is
prone to violence. Um And so what she was
trying to do is to take her philosophical understanding,
make her city better. Um And do it in
a way that was consistent with the philosophical ideals
that she embodied and she brought to, brought to
bear in the way that she lived in the
world. And so I think for the six years
that she's alive, what you see is somebody who
understood full well, the risks that she was taking,
she understood completely the kinds of um challenges she
would face as a woman trying to do this
work and she did it very eagerly because she
thought it was the right thing to do. Um
And you know, and she did it understanding completely
that there would be personal sacrifices that she would
have to make to have the impact on the
world that she wanted to. She did it anyway.
And so I think that that's, that's a different
type of heroism than being a martyr for a
cause um what, what that represents is somebody who
is really driven by a set of ideals um
and understands completely that there will be personal consequences
but assumes those consequences anyway.
Mhm Yes. We'll come back to this uh to
people thinking about type patient as a symbol or
a my even, let's say then uh really as
a person, but then how much do we know
about her life? Exactly.
So, um the sources that we have for a
patient's life are much less robust than we would
like. Um WE have a set of biographies or
a set of biographical treatments of her written by
a male pagan philosopher in the sixth century ad.
Um And he's writing at a moment where basically
he's in a persecuted community and he loves the
idea of martyrs. And so when he's talking about
Aesha, he leans into the martyrdom story, but he
had actually studied in Alexandria. And so he had
access to um substantial materials about what Aesha had
done based on, you know, the time that he
had spent in the city, we have a lot
of historical narratives that talk about her murder. Um
And some of them do it in a way
that contextualizes the murder to explain to an audience
why we should pay attention to this. Um These
sources are really important for reconstructing what we know
about her life. But we actually do have sources
that were written by or about or to her,
um, in the period before she died and those
I think are much more valuable because that's where
you get out who she was as a person.
So we have the equivalent of her doctoral dissertation,
um, which is a mathematical text. Uh, IT'S very
hard to read. Um, Greek mathematics are, you know,
really tricky because for example, uh the numbers, the
whole numbers are done on a base 100 system,
the decimals are done on a base 60 system.
And like Roman numerals, they're all letters. And so
you'll be reading a text and there'll be mathematical
things in there. And honestly, it's really hard to
even know when you're dealing with a whole number
in a decimal and what you do with it.
Um And so it is not a very accessible
text, but it is hers. She did write it.
Um You know, we do have her work and
people smarter than me who know about how to
read this, this numerical stuff, say that her um
mathematics is pretty elegant. Um And uh the contribution
that she makes is in taking some very unwieldy
material and making it much more um sim much
simpler and much more um clear than what had
been done before. So I think we can say
from that, that she's a very gifted mathematician, but
much more interesting for someone like me is uh
we have a set of letters written by one
of her students. Um INCLUDING five letters written by
Asia herself and then a couple of other, a
few other letters that mention life at her school.
Um And so for these, we have a document,
a set of documents that allow us to see
what it was like around her when she was
alive without this kind of filter of, we're setting
up a story to talk about how she dies.
Um And so when we're, when we're reconstructing her
life, this is the kind of stuff we have
to deal with. We're always struggling to distill out
the person from the myth, but we do have
some things that relate to the person before there
even was the myth. Um And those are invaluable
because you, it allows you to see this person
as she actually was and, you know, on the
terms that she sat while she was alive.
Mhm A and I guess that this is uh
an illustrative example of, mm I mean, a lot
of the work that historians do, right? When it
comes to studying the life of historical figures many
times, it's not that we have very well preserved
documents written by the person themselves, but we have
to reserve to secondary tertiary sources, what other people
said about them, wrote about them, what other people
thought about them and so on. That's basically the
way we try to bring the pieces together,
right? Yeah, I think um I think that that
is a perfect summation of it. I think what
we're always doing as people um is trying to
get through the filters that people create to understand
who the individual is. Um So, you know, in
a modern context, what you see on somebody's Instagram
or what you see on their um youtube channel,
that's not who they are, that's who they want
you to think they are. Maybe. Um IT'S the
stories that they want you to, to read about
them. It's, you know, it's a curated vision of
who that person is. Um We know that um
but in 100 years, I mean, assuming any of
this stuff is still around, um if you wanted
to reconstruct your life or my life using uh
you know, using the media that's out there about
us, you would have a vision of us, but
it would be a vision that is curated and
maybe it's very well curated and maybe it's very
sloppy, but it's a vision that doesn't relate to
who we are so much as who we want
to be seen to be. And so historians are
always dealing with this problem as well. Um It
just, we have a lot less when we're dealing
with somebody from the fourth century ad than when
we're going through somebody's Instagram posts now. But this
is always the challenge. And so um when you
have something that is transparently about creating a story
that symbolizes somebody in some ways, it makes it
easier because you know this person, you know what
they're trying to do in telling the story this
way. Um And so you're able to go through
find the details that are legitimate details that this
person has then transformed into an element of a
story in the way they wanna tell. And you
can take these details out and you can start
building a picture um from the details that are
clearly facts um that the person telling the story
is using to support their larger argument. Those facts
are still facts. And when you assemble enough of
them, you have a set of ideas that are
grounded in something like reality. You can use to
talk about who the person was and what they're
doing. Um And you know, and it's, it's the
work of a historian, but it's also the work
of, of everybody. You know, we are very well
trained now in doing this um in a 21st
century environment. It's just we have a lot less
when we're working with the fourth century,
right? And do we know how exactly high Paia
got interested in philosophy, how she got into philosophy
and then how she eventually rose to prominence as
a philosopher?
Yeah, it's actually, it's a really fascinating story because
um in antiquity, especially in, you know, the 4th
and 5th centuries, there's a real tendency among intellectuals
to try to um keep the intellectual traditions in
the family. So a lot of intellectuals when they
have Children. Um, IF they have a male child
they want to train them in the ideas and
the traditions of the intellectual, um, intellectual pursuits that
the father specializes in. If they have a female
dog, a female child, they like to train their
daughter in these pursuits as well for a couple
reasons. I mean, the first is, it's great if
you own a school to marry your daughter to
like your top student. And we see a number
of examples of this. Um, THE reason that they
like to do this is, of course, it keeps
the school in the family. Um, AND so, you
know, so you have your intellectual descendant and in
antiquity, if you studied under somebody, you were, you
were called the son or daughter of the person
that you studied under. Um, AND so you have
your intellectual son marrying your biological daughter. That's great.
Uh, BUT another thing that happens frequently is, you
know, the daughters get married in their teens and
the sons can get married in their thirties or
forties. So it is very common for, um, for
a husband in these relationships to be even a
generation older than his wife. And he very frequently
will die before his wife. Um, SOMETIMES he'll die
before his wife. Um, AND before his child is
even old enough to go to school. And so
it's a tradition in these, um, intellectual families to
train their daughters in rhetoric. And philosophy and mathematics
so that the daughters are capable of maintaining control
and, and supervising the education of the Children. So,
um so you have a lot of examples of
women from intellectual families getting the equivalent of, um,
you know, almost a graduate degree. You know, they,
they go through a very significant course of study
because it's their patrimony in a sense. Um And
they're going to be responsible for making sure that
the next generation of intellectuals in this family are
trained uh appropriately and have, you know, the right
teachers and the right background and the right skills
to succeed in this intellectual endeavor. And so this
is how a patient was brought up, you know,
she, she's the daughter of the top um mathematician
and philosopher in the city of Alexandria. And it's
expected that she's gonna have that training. Um And
I'm sure that what her father is anticipating is
she'll be trained in his school and in his
methods and, you know, and she'll be perfectly sufficient
in this and that will be great and she'll
marry somebody um who will then probably leave the
school and they'll have Children and she'll train the
Children and, you know, and that will be her
role. Um And what happens instead is Hypatia is
spectacular. I mean, she comes into the classroom and
not, she's not gonna be, it becomes very clear,
she's not gonna be the wife of the successor.
She's gonna be the successor uh because she is
far better than anybody else, including her father. Uh
And so what hype begins doing is, you know,
she, she's learning the mathematics in the Alexandrian way.
This idea that mathematics um correlates to philosophical truth
and the highest philosophical truth is actually understood through
mathematics. And she starts reading the works of philosophers
like Plains and porphyry. And she realizes that's not
true. She doesn't accept that, you know, she doesn't
believe that mathematics is a higher level way to
understand philosophy. Actually, she thinks it's the reverse. Um
And so she wants to follow Plato and this
idea that yeah, math is helpful because it gives
you very fixed ways to work with concepts. But
the forms are actually superior to numbers. Numbers are
in numbers are precise but inaccurate and they don't
give you a full picture of the larger um
philosophical concepts. And I Pish reads this and she
says, you know what this is right? Um And
she's an exceptional mathematician, but she ultimately goes to
her father and convinces him, you know, what you've
been doing this wrong. Um What, what you really
need to understand is concepts are more important than
numbers and concepts are where the higher level understanding
of the universe lives, not in numbers, but in
these ideas. Um And so we need to change
the way we teach. And her father who is
a member of the, the Museum in Alexandria, um
The top intellectual in the city. He not only
agrees to this, he retires and lets her take
over the school while he's still alive because he
basically says, yeah, she's better than me. You know,
she, she knows more than me. Um, SHE has
a better vision for what this philosophy should do
and she's a better teacher than me and a
better scholar than me. So why would I want
to stand in her way? Like, let's let philosophy
become better than I'm able to make it. Uh
And so he steps down and lets her take
over the school. Um, YOU know, probably when she's
in her thirties.
Mhm. A and back then what was basically the
social status of women? I mean, did people accept
that a woman herself would be the head of
a philosophy school or not?
Uh So it was possible but it wasn't easy.
So, the, the um understanding is that um women
can lead intellectual institutions but they're always going to
be facing, um, you know, people making jokes at
their expense, people discounting their expertise. Um, YOU know,
people making fun of the fact that they wear,
when a philosopher um in antiquity would go out
in public, they would wear a specific robe called
a Tron. Um It's kind of like when somebody
gets their, their doctoral degree and they get these
robes from the university that are really like grandiose
and floppy hats and all of this kind of
stuff. Um Yeah, I mean, there was the same
thing in antiquity, but you were expected actually to
wear that stuff around the city, um, especially in,
you know, any kind of ceremonial occasion. And so
she's wearing the philosopher's cloak and people joke. Well,
you know, it's a woman wearing the philosopher's cloak.
Like, isn't that funny? Um And in Greek, you
actually can do something with the language where you
talk about, um, the act of wearing a tree
bone and it can have a masculine or feminine
ending and it always has a masculine ending except
when they talk about Hypatia. Uh And so there
are authors that make a joke about like the
feminine ending of wearing a true bone and how
funny it is that, you know, she's doing that.
So her whole life she's dealing with this um
this understanding that yeah, it's possible for her to
run a school but also this kind of like
people giggling and joking and laughing about her and,
and also more malicious things like people saying, well,
she is a woman leading a philosophical school and
all of the students are men and um a
lot of philosophical teaching is done in public, but
some of it is done in private, especially the
graduate level work where it's just the teacher and
the graduate students. And so that's maybe 1015 people
at most. Um And so you have this environment
where you have Apacia and then 15 young men.
And so there are stories that start circulating about,
well, this is really like a sex cult or
something. Um And Hypatia has to diffuse those stories
too. So it is possible for a woman to
lead a school. It is there are other women
who led schools, but it's much harder for a
woman to do that work than for a man
to do the same thing. Um And I think
that's, that's what we have to acknowledge is uh
Roman society is the sort of place that makes
it easier for men to do a lot of
things, but it doesn't wholly preclude women from doing
them. But if a woman chooses to do it,
um you know, something like teach philosophy, she chooses
it, understanding full well that it is going to
be much harder for her to do this work
than for a man to do it. And she's
going to assume a lot of uh public scrutiny
that a man wouldn't get and she's going to
have to deal with a lot of stuff that,
you know, a regular person probably doesn't want to
deal with. And so while women can do this
work, a lot of them say, you know what?
Yeah, I don't really want to run my own
school because I don't wanna be in, I don't
wanna have this kind of scrutiny and I don't
wanna have this kind of um rumor mongering and,
and public, you know, hostility. So a lot of
women in antiquity who teach philosophy, actually do it
as a kind of subordinate teacher in a school
that is run by a man that's much more
common than a woman running her own school. Um
Mainly I think because, well, why do you want
the extra hassles and scrutiny and trouble of running
your own school when you can more or less
do the same thing and you don't have to
deal with any of that. Um And so what
ape is choosing to do by taking over for
her father, um, is I think a very conscious
choice uh to assume, to assume a lot of
burdens that she didn't need to assume. I mean,
she could have very happily continued teaching under her
father and not dealt with any of this stuff.
Right. So, I, I mean, this is very interesting
and I guess that will probably come back to
this point when, later on we talk about her
legacy. Uh BECAUSE, I mean, in that particular case,
perhaps, even if there weren't really actual institutional and
legal, I guess barriers to her be a leading,
uh, philosophy school, there were certain, certainly some social
and cultural barriers that she had to deal with.
Uh, I guess that we can even call it
discrimination in a sense. Right.
Yeah, I think that that's, I think that, um,
I think one of the challenges that, that I
had and I, and I, I still think I
have in conceptualizing the career of Hypatia is um
importing a kind of modern idea of what should
be fair um on an ancient context where I
don't think she thought that way. Like I, I
don't think she thought, well, it's unfair that I
have to do these things, I think instead she
thought, well, this is my burden. Um This is
how it is. And um you know, if I
need to do this work, well, that's my path
and I choose this path. Um And so there
wasn't any point in her saying something like this
is uh unequal treatment or this is um discrimination
against me. It wouldn't have made any difference to
the people listening. Um And she couldn't have changed
that and I think she understood that. Um And
so it's not that she's um leading a good,
you know, 19th century struggle for women's suffrage or
something. She doesn't expect that she's going to change
these conditions. Every woman is going to face these
conditions if they wanna do what she's doing. Um
She doesn't get into this to change those conditions.
She gets into, she gets into teaching philosophy because
that's her mission. And if it means she has
to endure things that her male colleagues don't, well,
then she has to endure things that her male
colleagues don't. She's not in this to make things
more fair for women. She doesn't, I think, imagine
that that's possible. Um BUT it's certainly not what
she is aiming to do, even if she thought
it could be possible. Um, SHE is fully accepting
the fact that for her entire life to perform
the mission that she believes she has to perform,
she is going to have to deal with um
much harsher conditions than she would face if she
was a man. Uh And so I think that
that's one of the things that we struggle with
because we, we assume that um in a modern
context, if you take an action like that, it
might get better. You know, if, if you are
a woman philosopher and you, you go into an
environment that is hostile to female philosophers, we imagine
that the example of that woman philosopher might make
that environment less hostile um Because she will, by
her example, change perceptions. That is not, I think
what Hypatia is doing. I don't think she imagines
for, for a moment that she's gonna change perceptions
or make things easier for the next female philosopher
in the future. I think she understands that the
conditions are going to remain bad for her for
her entire life and she does it anyway. Um
And there's a particular um a particular kind of
a set of assumptions there that I don't think
many people in the modern world really share.
Mhm So what were her main intellectual contributions? What
was she known for and is known for?
Uh SO I think one of the biggest things
that Iesha does of course, is is flipping Alexandria
from this strange way of thinking about philosophy to
this more conventional way of thinking about philosophy as
something guided by concepts, um larger concepts and larger
constructions of how the world should work. Uh I
think we can't undersell that, right. This is taking,
this is changing the entire intellectual identity of a
city um and changing its way of functioning and
teaching uh and doing it very quickly and doing
it as someone who is, you know, of course,
something of an outsider because um there aren't many
women who try to even do this and there
are very, very few who actually succeed in doing
this. Um But then I think the other contribution
that she makes is she understands how to take
this tradition of um philosophical thought that she's inherited
from thinkers like plains and porphyry and make it
something that is nondenominational in a religious context. Um
What basically this philosophy said is there is a
higher power, a a sort of unified divine entity
and all of the world flows out of this
um higher power. But it is possible if you
really um distill down the essence of truth and
focus your intellectual energies, it is possible for you
as a human to ascend from this sort of
messy world of matter to this higher sort of
spiritual plane and interact directly with the sort of
pure unfiltered wisdom that comes from this supreme entity.
What a patient realizes is this particular structure doesn't
define who that supreme entity is. It doesn't say
this is a pagan supreme entity and Christians are
wrong. What a basically says is, you know what,
this is a way of thinking about truth and
knowledge and I'm not gonna put a label on
it. You know, um if you are a Christian
and you believe that that supreme entity is a,
is a Christian God. Well, OK, you know, I
mean that, that great, you know, you do, you,
I do me as long as we believe in
this philosophical system and this, this contemplative approach. Um
You don't need to put a label on what
that divinity is to benefit from that particular approach.
You as a person can reach a higher spiritual
plane. And you know, if you are a Christian,
you come from a Christian tradition, this is a
contemplative activity. And so you, you can still go
to church, right? I'm not requiring you to do
pagan sacrifices to reach this Supreme God. And if
you're a pagan, um I'm not requiring you to
do pagan sacrifices to reach the Supreme God. Either
you can be in the same room with this
Christian thinking these same ideas, interacting with these same
concepts and having the same benefits that come from
being a philosopher. Um WHETHER you're pagan or Christian
and no one was doing this in the war
in the Roman world at the later part of
the fourth century. Um, WHAT I think she realized
is she lives in a Christian majority city. She
lives in a city where, um, pagans and Christians
disagree about a lot of things sometimes violently and
yet, um, there is a way philosophically to make
everybody better in a way that doesn't require you
to be pagan or Christian. Um, THERE is instead
a common path that everybody can follow that is
open to both pagans and Christians, but is philosophical
and is firmly grounded in, you know, 700 years
of thinking by people like Socrates and Plato and
Aristotle. And so the contribution that Ape makes is,
is to create a way for philosophy to function
in a Christian majority environment. Um And to function
well and meaningfully for both Christians and pagans without
requiring them to compromise their religious beliefs or to
do things that might run afoul of um the
religious practices of their communities.
So she was a philosopher, but she also participated
in the politics of Alexandria, right? Uh If and
if so, in what ways did she do it?
And uh also how did that tie to her
ideas about public service?
Yeah, I think that um this is a key
part of what it meant to be a philosopher
in antiquity, this idea of public service. Um One
of the, the key obligations that people from the
philosophical tradition that I belong to uh believe they
assumed was this responsibility to instruct everybody. You know,
this goes back to Socrates, right? And this, this,
this responsibility to instruct everybody to the degree that
a person is capable of understanding um the political
and ethical concepts that made society better. And so
it was the obligation of a of a practicing
philosopher to speak to everyone in their city. And
if they are intelligent and um well read and
interested, you can train them in highest level philosophy
so that they can ascend to this intellectual level
and interact with the supreme divinity. That's great. But
that's not everybody that's actually not most people. Um
Instead your obligation is to figure out, ok, I'm
talking to this person, their intellectual level is, is
here. How do I make them better? How do
I make them more philosophical? They're never gonna understand
the supreme divinity. They're not capable of doing that,
but maybe they are capable of understanding justice in
a, in a more rudimentary way. Well, then my
job is to instruct them in how to behave
more justly towards their fellow citizens. Um And so,
Hypatia, it was her um obligation as a philosopher
to interact politically with the people around her and
to train them to behave better in a way
that was consistent with philosophical practice, but also was
um calibrated so that it was consistent with their
ability to implement those, those teachings. Um And so
our patient, very much believed that in the city
of Alexandria, she needed to be available to anybody,
anybody who wanted to receive her guidance. Uh So
that meant that she kept her house more or
less open to anybody who wanted to come in
and get help. Uh And sometimes that meant she
would help them in a lawsuit. Sometimes that meant
they were new to the city and she would
help them find an apartment or a job. Uh
And sometimes that meant she would talk to them
about God, but she made sure that she was
available to everybody um to help them in whatever
way was most appropriate to their needs so that
she could make her city more broadly, um a
better, more philosophical place. Uh And she would do
this individually, she would also do this collectively. She
would give speeches, she would um meet with governors,
she would interact with the city council. Um You
know, she, she saw it as her obligation to
do political activities in every context um to make
philosophy felt in the public life of her city.
And so with the events then led to her
death, what happened? Exactly.
Yeah. So this is uh this is one of
those particularly Alexandrian tragedies. Um When we talk, when
we talked earlier about what is the dynamic like
in this city? You know, we talked about how
this is a very dense city. Um There are
a lot of people and uh these conflicts between
these people frequently became violent. Uh And so what
happened in the year 412 was you, you had
the death of the leader of the Christian community
in the city of Alexandria. Um MAN named Theophilus
and Theophilus had presided over a real significant outbreak
of violence in the early three nineties. But for
the next generation, I mean, for the next like
20 years, he and hypatia and people like hype
had um created a kind of common understanding that
this level of violence was, was a real problem
and they wanted to tone it down. Um And
so they had built a kind of way for
the leading members of the Christian community and people
like, aha and the leading sort of civic officials
to coexist, you know, and, and to let their
differences be resolved through communication and um conversation rather
than violence. Uh But in 412, Theophilus died and
there was a contested um election about who should
succeed him as the bishop of Alexandria. Uh THAT,
you know, because it's Alexandria resulted in violence. Um
And the person who, who came out on top
in the violence was um Theophilus nephew Cyril. Uh
The problem that Sil had is the violence had
been significant enough that there were communities in Alexandria
that actually weren't Christian that had weighed in on
this, including the city's very large Jewish community. Um
So Alexandria is maybe 10 to 20% Jewish where
the numbers vary. Um They're never a majority, they
know they're never going to be a majority, but
there are significant enough community uh that you do
have to pay attention to them if you're an
official in Alexandria. Uh And so, so Cyril starts
taking action against Christian communities that opposed him, um
administrators that opposed him and Jewish people who opposed
him. Uh And eventually the governor of Alexandria has
to step in and try to calm things down.
And what he decides to do is build a
coalition of people who are not supporters of Cyril
to try to rein the bishop in and he
more or less elects hype to build this co
this um coalition. So Hypatia do does what she's
supposed to do. She's a philosopher, she's been called
by a leader in her city to um step
in and try to make the city calmer and
more philosophical and she has succeeded in doing this
in the past. Um So she starts working with
the governor to try to create political conditions in
the city that are calmer and, you know, and
marginalize Cyril at the same time. Uh Cyril knows
that he would be hard pressed to actually go
after the governor. And so he starts making noises
about is this is IPA fault. You know, she's
the reason that we aren't, we aren't getting along.
Um There is a riot in which some of
serial supporters attack the governor. They throw a rock
at his head, um the person who did this
is arrested and executed. And at this point, the
rhetoric against hype becomes more aggressive. So we see
in our sources, um so very clear indications that
people around Cyril were saying things like Ape is
a witch. She's a magician, you know, she is
using magic to um make the governor not like
Cyril. And you know, and for this reason, um
something needs to be done. Now, we don't know
that Cyril himself said this. Um BUT there are
supporters of Cyril who decide that this, this uh
gives them grounds to attack Apacia. Um And so
this is kind of the lead up to her
murder. There is this, this growing tension in Alexandria,
it is this sort of periodic um move from
conversation to violence that happens every generation or so
in Alexandria. Uh And this is how she gets
caught up in it. And
so what was then the aftermath of her death?
How did people respond to it?
So the murder of Hypatia happens in Lent. Um
It doesn't seem that Cyril spoke directly to. This
doesn't seem that Cyril said go kill hype. Um
It doesn't even seem that Cyril endorsed it after
the fact. Uh But what you, what you have
are uh sit you have a situation where because
hype is so publicly available, it's actually easy to
grab her. What happens frequently in the Roman world
is mobs get angry at elites and most frequently,
what happens is the elites lived in these houses
that are very well fortified. You know, they have
a big gate. If you've been to the Mediterranean,
you've been to the city of Rome even, you
know, like the houses have very strong out facing
walls, very big doors, very strong gates. There's a
reason for that, right? Uh Mobs might come to
try to get you. And most of the time
what happens is they come, the gate is there.
You have um, bodyguards, they yell, they scream, maybe
if they're really mad, um, they might throw something
to try to burn your house down. But most
of the time you're not there at that point.
And, you know, and it's a ritual almost where
if you are um expressing your discontent about the
behavior of a leading person in a Roman city,
most of the time, it actually doesn't become violent.
They are intending to scare you, you know what's
going on and you moderate your behavior if, if
it bothers you and a lot of the time,
everybody knows that this is the, this is the
game, but her patient doesn't live that way. You
know, she doesn't live behind walls with shut doors
and, and closed gates. Um, WHEN she travels in
the city, she doesn't do it with bodyguards and,
you know, carried in a litter and protected. She
walks like a normal person. She behaves like a
normal person. Her door is open. And so if
you're angry at Hypatia, um you might have expected
that you left that day to go and yell
outside of her door to intimidate her. But suddenly
you find her in the street and she's not
protected and there's nobody preventing you from doing anything.
The mob loses control and it seizes Hypatia and
it kills her and it kills her very brutally.
Um They take her to a public square. Um
They take broken roof tiles and they tear her
body apart and then they burn her body um
in public as a way to purify the city
from the um wickedness that's supposedly attached to her.
Um I don't think Cyril knew this was gonna
happen. I don't think Cyril was particularly thrilled that
it did happen. Um And the outcry that you
see in sources suggests that there is almost nobody
in the entire Roman Empire, Christian or Pagan who
thinks this was justified. Um There's an imperial commission
that's sent to investigate this. Cyril escapes punishment um
for instigating this, this riot by basically bribing the
commissioners so that um he doesn't get found, you
know, responsible. Uh ONE of the organizations that Cyril
and the Alexandrian church had used as a kind
of um way to mobilize supporters and pressure opponents.
Uh This is disbanded by imperial officials despite Cyril's
bribes and all of our sources um written in
the immediate aftermath of Isac death. Talk about this
like it is an extremely serious breach in the
social fabric of the Roman Empire. Uh One of
these sources that I think is, is one of
the most interesting, has a, an entire to the
end of his history. And he has an entire
narrative where he's talking about how Roman society is
coming apart. And he gives a set of examples
from the four tens. Um The, you know, the
first one is a set of um violent confrontations
of constantinople that are, that are diffused more or
less because he thinks the bishop did a good
job. The next one is the sack of Rome
by Alaric in 410. You know, the event that
like beyond everything else in our imagination, um symbolizes
the decline of Roman, you know, Roman power and
Roman virtue and, and Roman um integrity in the
fifth century. For him, the murder of Hypatia is
an even more powerful symbol of the decline of
the Roman Empire than the sack of Rome. The
sack of Rome is, you know, the lead up
to what he sees as indicative of Roman society
is coming apart and it's the murder of Apacia
because for him, she is a person who is
just and true and behaving in a fashion that
um you cannot attack as partisan. What she's trying
to do is make her society better in the
purest way imaginable, not for material benefit, not because
she can like get an office out of it.
Not because she can seize imperial power. She's trying
to make her city better and, and her world
better because she believes it is her job to
make her city and her world better and she
dies for it. And so for Socrates Scholastics and
a lot of people like him, this is a
symbol of a sort of rip in the fabric
of the Roman world. Um THAT is incomprehensible. You
know, this is a person who is acting with
pure and true motives, who's killed because of those
actions. And he doesn't see how society comes back
from that.
And so in the centuries following her death, um
looking at, I don't know, other uh intellectuals and
even artists the way they have portrayed their reacted
to her. I mean, first of all, how common
is it across the history of philosophy for other
philosophers to actually get in touch with her work
or even become aware of her?
Um Nobody reads her work now that that commentary
is, you know, nobody really works on that material.
There's maybe 10 people in the world who work
on that material and the people who work in
it don't read her commentary. Um You know, so
I think in terms of her actual work, her
published work, um it's basically forgotten in terms of
the imp the impact of her actions that is
not forgotten at all. Um I think if you,
at one point, I looked at um how, how
many philosophers from antiquity, you know, who are the
most common philosophers in antiquity? Uh If you do
Google searches for their mentions and it's, you know,
it's the big three. So Plato Aristotle IPAC number
four. And so what is it that actually matters
about Apacia? It's actually, I think these, the deeds,
it's what she did. Um And this is something
that I think a lot of philosophers until very
recently downplayed philosophy is about thought and it's about
concepts, but it's about actions also. And so in
antiquity, um as you know, the, the French philosopher
Pierre do says, you know, actually philosophy is about
what you do. It's a way of life. And
what I think you get from hypia is not
so much. There's this particular doctrine that Apacia pioneered
or this particular way of, of solving a philosophical
problem that Apacia um discovered what you have is
somebody who in a most pure way embodies a
way of life, a philosophical way of life um
in a fashion that was consistent across her entire
life and also um led to her death. And
so I think when philosophers consider the influence of
a way of life, this too is why Socrates
matters to us. There's no writings from Socrates, but
we remember Socrates, because what Socrates did is embodied
a way of life in a fashion that was
particularly memorable and true and uncompromising. That's what Apea
did as well. Um YOU know, it's a different
moment than Socrates. She's a different person than Socrates.
But her legacy is as important uh or is,
is important like Socrates because like Socrates, she embodied
a way of life that philosophers believe to be
admirable. Um And a way of life that philosophers
believe should be emulated if one actually lives according
to the philosophical principles that one expounds.
So, uh could we say that she has been
influential as a philosopher or not?
Uh You know, again, I think um a lot
of philosophers would say she has no influence on
modern philosophy. Uh I would say that what I
would say, actually the opposite. I think she has
tremendous influence as um as a philosopher in the
way that most people think about philosophy. You know,
I, I think most of us agree that philosophy
is something that um should not be just an
abstract thing about concepts that have no bearing on
the world around us. Who cares about that? You
know, it, it, it's not why most of us
are interested in philosophy. It's not why lots and
lots and lots of people read stoicism. Now nobody's
reading Stoicism because they want to think more deeply
about, I don't know the, the end of the,
you know, the end of the universe or something.
Um They're thinking about stoicism because what it does
is it offers a very clear way to function
practically in the world. It offers practical ethics and,
and a way for us to um come up
with a way of life that makes our ability
to function in this environment that we inhabit better.
That's what philosophy ultimately does for most people who
are interested in philosophy. That's what Hypatia does. You
know, that's where she contributes to philosophy is. She
gives us in its almost purest form. Somebody who
is devoted to this idea that there is an
ethical way to behave, that's guided by higher principles
that can be organized systematically. And it is possible
to live your life consistently with that. And it
is possible to do it in a fashion that
is so uncompromising that you, you even give your
life to the principles that your um manner of
behaving in bodies. That's where I think her legacy
is most strong and that's why we still talk
about her, you know, because for most people, philosophy
isn't about like a particular doctrine of the soul
or a particular like way of approaching, I don't
know, atomic particles or something. Philosophy is about how
do you live better in the world around you?
That's what she was, that's what she did, you
know, and that's what her example allows us to
see.
But then, uh I mean, when it comes to
uh the history of philosophy itself and uh how
we she might or might not have influenced other
philosophers and the way philosophy developed in the West,
particularly, uh I'm asking you this because many times
we hear about Apacia and other female historical female
philosophers when there's, for example, some feminist philosophers talking
about them and even mentioning also some other contemporary
female philosophers that because they are women, they say
that's one of the main reasons why they haven't
played really a prominent role in the history of
philosophy or been very intellectually influential or something like
that. What do you think about that? Do you
think that that might have played a role there?
The fact that she was a woman compared to,
for example, prominent figures like Aristotle later and others
after them,
I think that the biggest reason we don't have
philosophical works by Hypatia um actually is because of
her murder. Um BECAUSE what her murder does is
it destroys this philosophical tradition in Alexandria that she
was building um the Athenian, the rivalry between Athens
and Alexandria was very real during Ab's life. But
in Athens, there was a tradition that was exclusively
pagan and actually involved pagan sacrifices as part of
your philosophical practice. So for a pia, the idea
of unifying with this spiritual realm was contemplative. You
know, you would um focus your life on philosophical
principles, you would eventually come to a point where
your mind was so undisturbed that it could ascend
to this level where you interacted with the divine.
And that was something that both Christians and pagans
could do in the same room in Athens. The
tradition was well, OK. Yeah, I mean, in theory,
you can do that but you can actually um
you can't do it that often and it's really
hard to do. And so you can move to
this level by doing certain rituals that help you
move to this level. And those rituals are of
course, pagan rituals because these philosophers are pagan. Um
WHEN Hypatia is killed, her version of that philosophy
is killed with her. Um And so the, the
tradition that she embodies it, it gets snuffed. And
so the texts that were consistent with that tradition,
once you know, the Athenian tradition develops out of
the ideas of a, a teacher named the Omics
in the fourth century. Plains and porphyry were texts
that both the Omics and Hypatia read. Hypia, didn't
interact with the Omics at all. And so the
Athenian tradition uses Plains and porphyry just as Hypatia
would have. But Apacia interaction with them is not
something that they are interested in. So, um this
Athenian tradition then becomes the dominant force in philosophy
in the fifth century because Hypatia has been killed.
Um And the, the reason that we don't talk
about Hypatia is because that Athenian tradition is the
tradition, ultimately that moves into Arab philosophy and it
moves into Byzantine philosophy. And so when Byzantine philosophers
are interacting with philosophy from the 4th and 5th
centuries, they're interacting with the Athenian philosophy, not the
Hyatt philosophy. And so um what it it is
an accident in a sense of his, of history
that a conflict between one set of approaches to
philosophy based in Athens and another set based in
Alexandria didn't happen because Hypatia was killed and when
she's killed, the school ends. Um And so her
intellectual legacy is snuffed out because of the murder.
So the, the, the texts and the um the
system, all of this stuff is destroyed because there
is no one to pick it up. So it
doesn't make it out of antiquity and into Byzantium.
And then this Byzantine tradition is what fino and
the Florentines. And um and ultimately, you know, our
entire structure of Western philosophy, that's where it comes
from. Um And so it is really in a
weird way, you know, her murder leaves this legacy
of practical philosophy that is unmatched by anybody from
that Athenian tradition, but it destroys the textual tradition
and the, the systematic sort of evolution of her
ideas um in a fashion that is unrecoverable. So
I think that, you know, I think that there
is a, a really, it's a really unfortunate situation
because it is possible that that Athenian tradition would
have been defeated by a Hyatt Alexandrian tradition. And
our philosophical tradition would actually now not be Elis
and all of the things that we see coming
out of 5th and 6th century Athens, it would
instead be Hypatia and a bunch of things that
would then come out of the descendants from her
line in Alexandria. And that's what was destroyed in
415.
So, at least in this particular case of Hypatia,
you don't think there's good enough evidence to suppose
that one of the reasons she's been mostly uh
ignored in the more, let's say, textual, actual philosophical
tradition in the West is much more accidental than
for uh than because of her being a woman.
I think so. Um You know, I just, I
think it, it is certainly possible that if in
the 17th century we had texts by hype, someone
would have made the decision to read other things
instead because she was a woman. Um And there
is actually, there's a really interesting example of a
female mathematician named PDR who um we know about,
she ran her own school and um and she,
you know, because of hypatia sort of work in
destroying this mathematical consensus, um her work and the
work of the people engaging with her is not
very well preserved either. But it's interesting that the
people who edited the text that mentions Pedroia's work
actually just there was a, a feminine article that,
you know, like she's marked as erosion. And the
person editing the text said, well, that must be
an error because it says she's a woman. So
they changed the text to say whole Pandian to
say she's a man and people went back and
said, wait a second. No, I mean, she's a
woman it's clear she's a woman, you know. So
there, there are definitely possibilities that had IPAs work
survived into the 17th or 18th century. Somebody would
have said exactly, you know, exactly this. Right. Well,
maybe she's not a woman or, you know, or
this work is not as good because she's a
woman. Nobody even had the chance. I think that's,
that's the thing, right? Like we can correct for
that, we can go back and say, here is
a voice that is underrepresented, but here's the voice
and like, let's rebuild um the tradition and say
that this voice has been underrepresented, but her voice
was destroyed. It never even got to the modern
period. And I think that's the, um that's the
great tragedy here. Uh You know, we don't even
have the opportunity to go back and do that
work um because of the destruction done in the
fifth century.
So I have one final question then in modern
times, in contemporary times, uh how do people look
at, at high pressure? Because earlier you mentioned people
looking at her mostly as a symbol and not
so much as the person she effectively was. So
uh but there's a symbol of what exactly, what
does IPA symbolize for modern people.
Yeah, this is, this is one of the most
interesting things about um reading about hy patient. I
mean, I for the, the book I went back
and I looked at all of these moments where
you see her from the 15th century to now.
And because she is understood as a symbol of
um a pure and total commitment to rationality and
intellectual pursuit, people put whatever they believe, the most
purest form of intellectual pursuit and, you know, commitment
should look like. So at various moments, you have
her as, you know, a symbol of um absolute
commitment to um stem, right? So Ara has her
as like a, you know, Copernican, which is totally
made up. I mean, it's like ridiculous. Um HYPE
was a lifelong virgin, but you actually have somebody
who writes a thing about Apacia that commits her
to um a lifestyle of like uh hedonism and
like, you know, lots and lots and lots of
sexual partners which I would have looked at and
said, like, she would have been horrified that, that,
that anybody would think that's her legacy. Um But,
you know, you, you, it becomes something where whatever
ideas you particularly think are the purest, you can
make Hypatia a symbol of those ideas and you
can talk about irrationality and intolerance, destroying those ideas
that you think ought to be preserved and supported.
Um And hypia becomes a sort of stand in
for, for that. Um And II, I think that's
um something we have to be very aware of
any time IP is introduced in a conversation. She
is a symbol and it's a symbol that is
extremely resonant because the purity is absolute you know,
this is somebody who truly lived according to a
set of principles that she understood very deeply. Um
She thought very hard about how those principles should
guide her behavior. She behaved completely in accordance with,
you know, the system that she developed and she
died because of it. And there's something really admirable
about a story like that, but there's also something
very malleable about a story like that. And you
can take that and take whatever principles you want
and use her as a metaphor to illustrate complete
commitment to whatever principles you think are most important.
Um And it's a very dangerous thing because in
a lot of those cases, I just would not
have agreed with you. The hypatia that you create
was not a hypatia that ever existed. Um And
I think there is uh an obligation that we
have to the people in the past to be
true to their memory. You know, if we can
understand what somebody was about, we can't understand all
of what somebody was about. We can't understand all
of what their concerns and ideas were. But if
we can understand to some degree what they were
like and what was important to them, we should
try to be true to, to those ideals. Um
And putting her patient in a situation that she
would not be at all comfortable with is I
think doing some measure of injustice to an actual
person who actually did live actually did um feel
things and, you know, have emotions and have reactions
and feel tension and feel pressure and, you know,
and made choices. We should be true to that
because we would want someone to do that for
us too.
Well, I would imagine that Taipei would not be
alone when it comes to historical figures that are
commonly who or whose ideas are commonly misrepresented.
Yes, absolutely.
OK. Great. So, the book is again, Hypatia, the
life and legend of an ancient philosopher. And of
course, I'm leaving a link to it in the
description of the interview and also links to our
two previous interviews and Doctor Watts just before we
go. Would you like to tell people again where
they can find you and your work on the
internet?
Sure. Uh I have a youtube channel that's called
Eternal Decline of Rome. Um And we post on
there, um all sorts of things about Rome and
it is also the place where I, as I
say it, it's where I put my outtake. So
I'm doing research and I find something that's interesting
that is never gonna make a book. Um You
know, I'll do a little videos on those. So
if you're interested in Roman stuff, big or small,
that's a good place to go.
Great. So, Doctor Watts, thank you again, so much
for taking the time to come on the show.
And as I said, at the beginning, it's always
fun and a real pleasure to talk to you.
Absolutely. Well, I love it and I, I look
forward to talking again soon.
Hi guys. Thank you for watching this interview. Until
the end. If you liked it, please share it.
Leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by the N Lights
learning and development. Then differently check their website at
N lights.com and also please consider supporting the show
on Patreon or paypal. I would also like to
give a thank you to my main patrons and
paypal supporters, Pero Larson, Jerry Muller and Frederick Suno
Bernard Seche O of Alex Adam Castle Matthew Whitten
Bear, no wolf, Tim Ho Erica J Conners, Philip
for Connolly. Then the Mere Robert Wine in NAI
Z Mark Nevs Colin Ha Brookfield, Governor Mikel Stormer
Samuel Andre Francis for Agns Ferus and Hall Herz
Michel J and Labyrinth, Jy and Hes Mark Smith.
J Tom Hummel S David Wilson, Ro Ro Jan
Punters, Charlotte Bli Nico Barba, Adam Hunt, Pavla Stass
Nale Me, Gary al Seo Zal and YP JJ
Price Edward Hall, Eden Broer Douglas Franca la Gil
Cortez Solis Scott Zachary. Ftw Daniel Friedman, William Buckner,
Paul Giorgio, Luke Loi Georgio Theophano Chris Williams and
Peter Oin David Williams Di Costa Anton Erickson, Charles
Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralie Chevalier, Bangalore Larry
Dey Junior, Old Ebon Starry Michael Bailey. Then Spur
by Robert Grassy Zorn, Jeff mcmahon, Jake Zul Barnabas
Radick, Mark Temple, Thomas Dvor Luke Neeson, Chris Tory
Kimberley Johnson, Benjamin Gilbert Jessica Week in the B
brand Nicholas Carlson, Ismael Bensley Man, George Katis, Valentin
Steinman, Perlis Kate Von Goler, Alexander Albert Liam Dae
Biar Masoud Ali Mohammadi Perpendicular Jer Urla. Good enough,
Gregory Hastings David Pins of Sean Nelson, Mike Levin
and Jos Net. A special thanks to my producers,
these our web, Jim Frank Luca Stina, Tom Vig
and Bernard N Cortes Dixon, Bendik Muller Thomas Trumble,
Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John Carlman, Negro, Nick Ortiz
and Nick Golden and to my executive producers, Matthew
Lavender, Si Adrian Bogdan Knits and Rosie. Thank you
for all.